Metabolomics offers insight into connections between the small molecule content of an organism and its health status. As the metabolomics literature expands, comparison between or meta-analysis of related metabolomics datasets holds the potential to provide deeper insight into fundamental biology and specific diseases or interventions. Such meta-analyses are made more difficult by the diversity of methods used, the complexity of the data, and inconsistent metabolite and metadata nomenclature.  Yet most metabolomics data does contain certain common elements. Processed metabolomics data is typically formatted as a compound-by-compound table of abundance values (typically, peak area or peak height) for all of the samples analyzed in the study.  It also typically contains information regarding compound identity (often a compound name, when known), mass-to-charge (or neutral mass) and retention time data for each feature, metadata regarding sample or subject groups and related information, and filename(s) for the associated raw data. Raw LC-MS data files may be provided either in instrument vendor-specific or generic (.mzml) format and should be linked to the tabulated data by filename.

We have developed a workflow to facilitate meta-analysis of multiple metabolomics datasets, and have demonstrated this workflow by performing meta-analysis of metabolomics  datasets focused on physical activity. Our approach enables analysis of data from the tabulated level described above, to allow consistent statistical parameters to be used across all studies included.  When necessary, raw data files can be re-processed to generate appropriate data, if tabulated peak area /peak height data are not provided. We have established a workflow for formatting, upload, and meta-analysis of multiple independent metabolomics datasets which study a common biological effect -- in our case, the effect of an acute bout of physical activity on the metabolome of human plasma. The workflow differs slightly depending on whether the metabolomics data is targeted (named compounds only), untargeted (features annotated by mass and retention time only) or a hybrid of the two.  Within this repository are separate folders for targeted and untargeted metabolomics data meta-analysis workflows.  Example files providing formatting requirements are included within each folder. The folders also contain R scripts which contain code that can be used for meta-analysis of appropriately formatted metabolomics datasets from different studies, supporting correction for cofactors and allowing flexible assignment of sample groups to compare across studies. 

Please submit questions regarding these scripts to the repository host. We welcome feedback and questions.